.TH "dwl-guile" "1" 
.SH "NAME"
.PP
\fBdwl-guile\fP -- dynamic tiling Wayland compositor configurable in Guile Scheme
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
\fBdwl-guile -c\fP \fICONFIG\fP
.br
\fBdwl-guile -e\fP \fISEXP\fP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBdwl-guile\fP is a hackable and Guile Scheme-configurable \fBdwm\fP-inspired Wayland compositor that is based on \fBdwl\fP.

.PP
At startup: \fBdwl-guile\fP loads a Guile Scheme configuration file \fICONFIG\fP.

.PP
At runtime: the user can evaluate a \fISEXP\fP to interact with \fBdwl-guile\fP. This includes specifying (additional) key bindings, setting client rules, viewing tags etc. A \fISEXP\fP can also be evaluated using a REPL client over a Unix socket.
.SH "DEFAULT KEY BINDINGS"
.SS "Modifiers:"
.PP
\fBdwl-guile\fP uses the same conventions as \fBemacs\fP for its key bindings:
 \fBS\fP Shift
 \fBC\fP Control
 \fBs\fP Super
 \fBM\fP Meta/Alt

.SS "Key bindings"
.PP
The default key bindings are:
 \fBs-[1-9]\fP                    Show only all windows with a tag.
 \fBs-C-[1-9]\fP                  Show all windows with a tag.
 \fBs-S-[1-9]\fP                  Move window to a single tag.
 \fBs-C-S-[1-9]\fP                Toggle tag for window.
 \fBs-0\fP                        Show all windows.
 \fBs-S-0\fP                      Show window on all tags
 \fBs-[j/k]\fP                    Move focus down/up the stack.
 \fBs-[h/l]\fP                    Decrease/increase master area.
 \fBs-<space>\fP                  Move window on top of stack or switch top of stack with second window.
 \fBs-<tab>\fP                    Show only all windows with previous tag.
 \fBs-<page-[up/down]>\fP         Increase/decrease number of clients in master
 \fBs-t\fP                        Switch to next layout.
 \fBs-q\fP                        Close window.
 \fBs-S-<space>\fP                Toggle floating state of window.
 \fBs-f\fP                        Toggle fullscreen state of window.
 \fBs-<[left/right/up/down]>\fP   Change monitor focus
 \fBs-S-<[left/right/up/down]>\fP Move tag to monitor
 \fBs-d\fP                        Spawn \fBbemenu-run\fP.
 \fBs-<return>\fP                 Spawn \fBfoot\fP.

.SH "CONFIGURATION"
.PP
The configuration file is written in Guile Scheme.

.PP
\fBdwl-guile\fP applies configuration changes dynamically so that you can see the changes in real-time. A set of default configuration settings (including the key bindings above) will load automatically unless \fBinhibit-defaults?\fP is set to \fB#t\fP.

.PP
A few of the configuration options are mandatory and cannot be inhibited. You can override these if they do not suit your needs.

.PP
General options can be set using \fB(set '<option> <value>)\fP or \fB(setq <option> <value>)\fP. For a list of available options, execute \fB(dwl:list-options)\fP using \fBdwl-guile -e\fP or the REPL. The source code also contains a list of all options in the \fBdscm/config.h\fP file.

.SS "Tags"
.PP
It is mandatory to set the number of tags.
The default is to use tags 1-9 as such:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(setq tags (map number->string (iota 9 1)))
\fP
.fi
.RE
.SS "Layouts"
.PP
At least one layout must be set, which is why \fBdwl-guile\fP will automatically add it for you, even if \fBinhibit-defaults?\fP is \fB#t\fP. The default setting adds only the \fBtile\fP layout:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-layouts 'default "[]=" 'dwl:tile)
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Including both the \fBtile\fP and \fBmonocle\fP layouts can look like this:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-layouts 'default "[]=" 'dwl:tile
.B
             'monocle "|M|" 'dwl:monocle)
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Note that \fB'default\fP and \fB'monocle\fP are unique identifiers for their respective layouts. A monitor rule can use these identifiers to assign a certain layout to a specific monitor. Adding a new layout with an identifier that already exists will simply override the options of the previous layout.

.SS "Monitor rules"
.PP
A valid configuration file should contain at least one monitor rule without a specified \fBname\fP field, e.g.:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-monitor-rules '((masters . 1)
.B
                     (master-factor . 0.55)
.B
                     (scale . 1)
.B
                     (transform . TRANSFORM-NORMAL)
.B
                     (layout . default)))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
To configure a dual-monitor setup with two horizontally adjacent monitors you could write something like this:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-monitor-rules '((name . "HDMI-1") (x . 0) (y . 0))
.B
                   '((name . "DP-1") (x . 1920) (y . 0)))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.SS "Client rules"
.PP
Windows containing certain clients can be set to spawn in floating mode, be assigned to specific tags and/or monitors.

.PP
Here, the chosen client \fBemacs\fP is identified by its \fBid\fP and is set to spawn on tag 1 as a tiled window on the current monitor:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-rules '((id . "emacs")
.B
             (tags . 1) ;; can also be a list of tags
.B
             (floating? . #f)
.B
             (monitor . -1))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
A rule can additionally match a window title with the help of \fBtitle\fP.

.SS "Colors"
.PP
Colors can be specified in RGBA format or hex format, i.e. \fB'(1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0)\fP or \fB"#001122FF"\fP (or just \fB"#FFFFFF"\fP if alpha is not needed).

.PP
The following snippet applies a red color to the border of the window that is in focus:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(setq focus-color "#ff0000")
\fP
.fi
.RE

.SS "Hooks"
.PP
Two 'hooks' exist in \fBdwl-guile\fP, namely \fBdwl:hook-startup\fP and \fBdwl:hook-quit\fP.
These hooks can run some user-defined code on startup or upon exit, e.g.:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(add-hook! dwl:hook-quit (lambda () ...))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Note that the startup hook will run in its own separate thread, which means that executing blocking, long-running operations is perfectly fine.

.PP
Additional hooks must be added in the C source code and it is currently not possible to add new hooks through the configuration file.

.SS "XKB rules"
.PP
The following syntax is used to specify X keyboard rules in the configuration file:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-xkb-rules '((model . "...")
.B
                 (layout . "...")
.B
                 (rules . "...")
.B
                 (variant . "...")
.B
                 (options . "...")
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Each field accepts a string with comma-separated options for XKB. Refer to the XKB manual for additional details.

.SS "Key bindings"
.PP
Keyboard and mouse bindings are added with the \fBset-keys\fP procedure.

.PP
The following bind \fBs-<return>\fP to spawn a new client with the \fBfoot\fP terminal:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-keys "s-<return>" '(dwl:spawn "foot"))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
A single \fBset-keys\fP call can set multiple bindings at once -- this applies to most of the other procedures as well.

.PP
The action of a keybinding can be set in three ways:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fC(set-keys "s-<return>" '(dwl:spawn "foot") ;; Expression, no syntax-checking on startup
.B
          "s-<space>" 'dwl:zoom)           ;; No arguments allowed
.B
          "s-<return>" (lambda (dwl:spawn "foot"))
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Choose whichever method that is most convenient, but remember that the syntax-checking that comes with using symbols or lambda expressions might be useful if you must debug your configuration for some reason.

.SH "REPL SERVER"
.PP
\fBdwl-guile\fP can host a REPL server that listens on a Unix socket with default path \fB/tmp/dwl-guile.socket\fP (also available as variable \fB%dwl:repl-socket-path\fP).
You can connect to the REPL with e.g. the \fBgeiser\fP package for \fBemacs\fP (\fBM-x\fP \fBgeiser-connect-local\fP
and point it to the aformentioned socket).

.PP
The REPL is disabled in the default configuration. \fB(dwl:start-repl-server)\fP enables it.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.PP
Start \fBdwl-guile\fP with a configuration file called \fBinit.scm\fP, found in the directory \fB\fC/home/user/.config/dwl\-guile\fP\fP:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fCdwl-guile -c /home/user/.config/dwl-guile/init.scm
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
View clients assigned to tag 2:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fCdwl-guile -e "(dwl:view 2)"
\fP
.fi
.RE

.PP
Bind \fBs-q\fP to kill the current client:

.PP
.B
.RS
.nf
\fCdwl-guile -e "(set-keys \\"s-q\\" 'dwl:kill-client)"
\fP
.fi
.RE

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fBguile\fP​(1),
\fBfoot\fP​(1),
\fBbemenu\fP​(1),
\fBdwm\fP​(1),
\fBxkeyboard-config\fP​(7)
